Welcome to Leadership Essentials.
Online learning for youth
development professionals.
Alcohol beverage laws.
Think before you drink.
This module will focus on the laws
related to alcoholic beverages.
We come into contact with these beverages
in our everyday life.
Whether that be beer or wine or liquor.
In the United States and in most countries
around the world,
there are laws regulating the purchase,
the possession and the consumption
of these beverages.
These laws exist because
of the intoxicating effect
of alcoholic beverages.
Consumption can impair you
mentally or physically.
That impairment can cause
you to injure yourself
or others.
Why do you need to know about these laws?
If you're going to work into summer camp
or summer camp program,
there are three essential reasons.
First, inappropriate use of alcohol
can affect your job.
Here's how.
As you know from the module series
on Duty of Care.
You have the duty to care for the
safety of the children
enrolled in your program.
You can't carry out that duty
if your judgement is impaired by alcohol.
You're a role model to the children
with whom you will be working.
Your job is to model appropriate behavior,
breaking the law or working while hungover
or intoxicated would be
extremely poor role modeling.
Even during your time off away from camp,
you are likely to known
by the camp or program
for which you work.
Their reputation is
affected by your behavior
in the use of alcohol.
Second, the use of alcohol
in violation of the law
can lead to criminal or civil liability.
That puts in jeopardy your job at camp,
and in the future.
It also could harm the camp's reputation.
Third, you may reside in
a different jurisdiction
from where you are going
to work in a summer camp
or program.
It's the laws and the jurisdiction
where you're going to work
control the purchase and
use of alcoholic beverages.
You need to make sure
you know what those laws are.
Here's a general description of the laws
related to alcoholic beverages.
But remember, when you get to your camp
or summer program,
you need to make sure that you know
what the specific laws are there.
I've asked some staff
members to put on a skit,
showing acts related to
alcohol which are illegal.
Watch the skit and see
whether you can identify
three violations related to age.
Can you also identify other
alcohol law violations
not related to age?
We need more beer.
What are you going to do about it?
You're not old enough.
No, no, no, I know a place
they don't check ID,
I've been there before
and I've gotten beer.
That sounds awesome.
Can I come too?
I just...
Can I borrow your ID--
Sure, I guess we look enough like.
Thanks man.
Hey, I'll drive.
I'm 21.
Let me finish this first.
(celebrating)
Age restrictions are a common element
of alcohol laws.
In the United States,
the line between legal
and illegal is 21 years.
In countries other than the United States
that age may range from 16 through 21.
You must be of age
at least 21 in the U.S.
to purchase, to possess,
or to consume alcoholic beverages.
Each is a separate offense.
Purchasing and consumption are obvious.
But remember if these two acts are illegal
then mere possession of alcohol
is likely to be illegal as well.
Did you get all three?
There are other laws
that relate to alcohol
without regard to age.
These laws include the following.
It's illegal in the United States
to provide, to possess,
or to use a fraudulent ID
to purchase alcoholic beverages.
In the skit you saw,
all three of these
offenses were committed.
Every jurisdiction
regulates alcohol by age.
It's likely they have similar laws.
In the United States and
many other jurisdiction,
it's a violation to
consume alcoholic beverages
or to have an open container of alcohol
in a moving vehicle.
Any container is open
if its seal is broken.
Even if the lid has been refastened.
Also it maybe against the law
to consume alcoholic beverages
or have an open container
in a public place,
such as a street sidewalk, park or beach.
Breaking these laws can result in a fine,
even going to jail.
And remember, these laws can be violated
without intoxication.
Let's turn now to laws
related to intoxication.
In every state in the United States,
in every province, in Canada,
and in most other countries,
there are laws that prohibit the operation
of a motor vehicle while intoxicated.
In some jurisdiction this is called
operating under the influence or OUI.
In others it's called
driving while intoxicated,
or DWI.
In most jurisdiction with these laws,
motor vehicles include automobiles
and other vehicles that normally
operate on the roadway, boats,
or off-road vehicles,
including ATV's or snowmobiles
may also be included.
And in some jurisdictions
in the United States,
even non-motorized vehicles
such as bicycles are included.
Intoxication maybe proved
by one of two methods.
One, determination of
the amount of alcohol
in the body by measuring the amount
in your blood or breath.
In the United States,
one is intoxicated in violation of the law
if the percent of alcohol
in that person's blood
is at or above .08.
So how many drinks do
you think you can have
before your blood level is .08% or higher?
That depends on a number of factors
including your gender, your body mass,
the amount of food in your stomach,
the amount of time drinking,
and the time since your last drink.
The safe rule is that blood alcohol levels
will not exceed the legal limit.
If you do not consume more
than one drink per hour,
but consider this about the .08% threshold
in the United States.
In Australia, and New Zealand,
and some European countries
intoxication is demonstrated
with a blood alcohol level
of only .05%.
It's not because it's easier to get drunk
in those countries,
it's because impairment
begins from the first moment
that you begin to drink.
That impairment diminishes your ability
to operate a car or care for children.
Intoxication can also be
proven by the testimony
of a police officer who stops you.
The following testimony is sufficient
to lead to a conviction of OUI.
Observation of the operation of your car
in a manner inconsistent
with normal operation,
weaving, drifting, too fast or too slow
or erratic operation.
Observation of blood shut eyes,
or unusually sized pupils.
The smell of alcohol in your breath.
Slurred speech, impaired reasoning
or poor physical coordination.
Listen, based on my observations,
you had too much to drink to be operating
a motor vehicle safely,
and I'm going to be placing
you under arrest for OUI,
so turn around and put your
hands behind your back.
Violation of intoxication laws
can lead to a fine.
With increasing fines for
subsequent violations.
Loss of driving privileges,
and even jail time.
Being found guilty can do
more than ruin your day.
You're likely to get
fired from your camp job.
You've damaged the reputation of the camp
where you worked.
The record of your conviction
can negatively affect your goals
for future employment.
Up to this point I've been talking about
laws of the state or province or country,
but there maybe other laws
related to alcohol use
in your jurisdiction.
These laws impose financial
responsibility on you
for the injury to somebody else
caused by your conduct.
They are often called
liquor liability laws.
You likely already know
that if you injure someone
because you're intoxicated,
you may be financially
liable for the damages
or injury you've caused.
For example,
if you hit or injure a person
by operating your car while intoxicated,
that person can sue you
and recover damages for
the injuries she suffered.
In addition liquor liability law
can impose financial
liability on you for merely
giving someone else an alcoholic beverage.
For example you give
alcohol to another person,
say a fellow staff member
who is visibly intoxicated
or is too young to legally drink.
Later while she's operating her car,
she causes a collision
because she's impaired
by the alcohol that you gave her.
In that collision
she injures herself or somebody else.
You maybe financially
responsible for that injury.
Or if you return to camp
intoxicated and injure a child
or unable to assist a child in need,
you may be financially
responsible for that injury.
This child for example is sick,
but can't wake up.
Her intoxicated cabin counselor.
So what's the bottom line here?
First, know what the alcohol laws are
where you will be working.
Second, don't buy or
give alcoholic beverages
to someone who is not old
enough to legally drink
or who is visibly intoxicated.
Third, if you are not of age,
don't ask someone who
is to get or give you
alcoholic beverages.
To do so is asking them to break the law
and possibly be financially
liable for your acts.
It's not something that
friend or colleague would do.
Fourth, when you've been drinking
the best course is to
appoint a designated driver,
someone who has consumed no alcohol at all.
Fifth, stop consuming
alcohol at least eight hours
before you are going back on duty in camp.
Finally if you're ever intoxicated,
impaired or even hungover in camp,
have the courage to tell your supervisor
and don't work until you're able.
Yes, it's going to make your boss unhappy.
But think about the alternative,
the child could be injured or killed
because something you do or failed to do
because you are impaired
by the use of alcohol.
Better to be honest and
upfront about the mistake
than risk the alternative.
So remember,
you cannot do your duty
of care for children
if you're intoxicated
by alcoholic beverages.
This summer, cope with
stress in healthy ways.
Spend your time off wisely,
and support your colleagues
in making smart decisions.
Before I close I want to acknowledge
the fine work of the
campers and counselors
that helped me produce this module.
Some of the acting showed conduct
which was unsafe or inappropriate.
Such conduct was just acting,
and does not accurately reflect
their behavior in camp.
That wraps up this leadership essential.
Thanks for watching and
have a great summer.
For quizzes handouts
and other resources,
explore more on expertonlinetraining.com.